Hear God's word from Genesis chapter 45.
Then Joseph could not control himself before all those who stood by him.
He cried, make everyone go out from me.
So no one stayed with him when Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
And he wept aloud, so let the Egyptians heard it.
The household of Pharaoh heard it.
And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph.
It's my father still alive.
But his brothers could not answer him, for they were dismayed at his presence.
So Joseph said to his brothers, come near to me, please, and they came near.
And he said, I am your brother, Joseph, whom you sold into Egypt, and now do not be distressed or angry with yourselves because you sold me here.
For God sent me before you to preserve life.
For the famine has been in the land these two years, and there are yet
five years in which there will be neither plowing nor harvest, and God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on earth, and to keep alive for you many survivors.
So it was not you who sent me here, but God has made me a father to Pharaoh and Lord of all his house and ruler over all the land of Egypt,
and go up to my father and say to him, this says, your son, Joseph, God has made me, Lord, of all Egypt, come down to me, do not tear thee.
You shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and you shall be near me.
You and your children and your children's children and your flocks, your herds, and all that you have there I will provide for you.
For there are yet five years of famine to come, so that you and your household and all that you have do not come to poverty.
And now your eyes see in the eyes of my brother Benjamin see that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
You must tell my father of all my honored Egypt and of all that you have seen, hurry and bring my father down here.
Then he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck and wept and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
And he kissed all his brothers and wept upon them.
After that, his brothers talked with him.
When the report was heard in Pharaoh's house, Joseph's brothers have come, a pleased Pharaoh and his servants.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, say to your brothers, do this.
Load your beast and go back to the land of Canaan and take your father and your households and come to me and I will give you the best of the land of Egypt and you shall eat the fat of the land.
And you Joseph are commanded to say, do this.
Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives and bring your father and come.
Have no concern for your goods.
For the best of all, the land of Egypt is yours."
The sons of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them wagons according to the command of Pharaoh and gave them provisions for the journey to each and all of them.
He gave a change of clothes, but to Benjamin, he gave 300 shekels of silver and five changes of clothes.
To his father, he sent as follows, 10 donkeys loaded with the good things of Egypt, and 10 female donkeys loaded with grain, bread, and provision for his father on the journey.
Then he sent his brothers away, and as they departed, he said to them, do not quarrel on the way.
So they went up out of Egypt, came to the land of Canaan to their father, Jacob.
And they told him, Joseph is still alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt.
And his heart became numb, for he did not believe them.
But when they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father, Jacob, revived.
And Israel said, it is enough.
Joseph, my son, is still alive.
I will go and see him before I die.
The grass weathers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever.
And then you may be seated.
Pray with me.
Merciful God, we give you thanks for your word.
Your word which truly stands forever.
Your word which is alive and active.
Your words which cuts through all the layers we try to put between us and your word, and I pray that you would
Speak to us mightily this morning.
Your spirit would apply these words to our lives and give us conviction and strength to carry them out in our daily lives.
We pray this in your holy name, amen.
I remember once growing up, I had a youth pastor who was preaching from the gospels preaching about forgiveness and Jesus's command.
You know, and the disciples come to Jesus and they say, Jesus, how many times we gotta forgive?
You gotta wonder like,
What's the precursor to someone having to ask that kind of questions?
Like, hey, this guy, yeah, I got this uncle.
How many times I really got to forgive them?
And Jesus says this kind of a strange answer, seven times 77, which is not our passage, isn't about that specific passage.
So just take my word for it.
That means you always have to forgive.
Like you can't get out of it.
So you know, you always have to forgive.
When someone asks for forgiveness, you always have to forgive.
And, you know, Youth Pass was teaching about that.
I was like, yeah, that seems to make sense.
Sounds pretty easy.
I can't imagine having an enemy, you know, praying for those who persecute you.
I was like, that sounds easy.
Someone asked me, I have forgiveness is easy.
And I thought it was the easiest thing that God asked me to do.
And then you live a little.
And then you start to get wounded by people.
And it's not just like someone that you don't know that wounds you, it's someone that you know really well, someone that's close to you wounds you, and you experience betrayal.
And that's kind of a different kind of wound.
That's not an easy one to just let go and forgive.
And that's when those commands started to take root in my life.
It's like, well, how do you actually forgive people?
And maybe what puts a little bit of finer point on this
is when you stop and you consider what forgiveness actually means.
Which I don't know, I think we have the sense of what it means to forgive.
Yeah, you kind of let go of someone's offense against you.
But one of my favorite definitions comes from a guy named Tim Keller.
He wrote a book on forgiveness.
It's a book I commend to you.
But he kind of defines it like this.
It's releasing someone of debt that's owed to you.
So someone sins against you that they've incurred a debt.
He says that forgiveness is releasing someone of debt that's owed.
and releasing a right to revenge on that person.
Now, when you consider the definition of forgiveness, something like that, all of a sudden the idea of forgiving somebody is even harder, isn't it?
Especially when someone's wounded you deeply, profound betrayal.
And one of the reasons why it's hard, I've been thinking about this for myself for maybe some
people that are hard for me to forgive.
No one in this room, of course, I'll forgive any of you for any offense very quickly.
It's other people, it's just people out there that you have to worry about.
But when someone wounds you deeply, I think the reason why I hold on and don't want to forgive is that I'm worried, am I just excusing their behavior?
Am I making light of their offense against me by letting it go?
Is this kind of making it cheap?
Am I minimizing it?
Am I saying by letting it go and forgiving that what they did against me is actually
It's just not that big a deal.
I can just let it go.
Don't worry about it.
I think we worry about that.
And I wonder how in the world is that fair, especially when you've been wounded deeply and the betrayal is profound.
So what do we do with that?
Well, we know that we have to forgive because Jesus tells you, you have to forgive.
If you want me to forgive you, you got to forgive others.
And so we go through the motions.
We say the words.
Yes, I forgive you.
It's like, you know, parents, when you got your kids fighting, you pull them together and say, say, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Say, I forgive you, I forgive you.
Okay, no hug.
And now you go, okay, be friends.
It's like, well, is that actually happening in that moment?
No, are those words important to say still?
Yes, you should still make your kids say those words.
But you also know the difference between saying something and actually meeting something.
So we say the words.
We say, yeah, of course I forgive that person, but, right, but I still hold this against them.
I still hedge my bets around this person.
We still hold on to it.
We still have a, when someone's name is mentioned that we have an offense with the bitterness creeps up and that bitterness feels good because that person's indebted to us.
We have power over them.
So how can we possibly actually work through this and learn to be a forgiving people?
How can we?
I mean, this is where Joseph's story here in chapter 45 of Genesis is so powerful.
Do you remember Joseph's history, right?
He was sinned against grievously.
He was sold into slavery by his brothers.
Pretty big deal.
And now he's finally in this position to exact his revenge against his brothers.
He's got this power over them.
And he's in a position, he can do whatever he wants to them.
And the Pharaoh won't think twice about it.
He's like, yeah, I guess they deserved it.
He could torture them for the rest of their lives.
And what does he do?
He doesn't seek revenge, he forgives.
Not just forgives, he has restored relationship with them.
It's a powerful scene.
Although the words for goodness and reconciliation are not used at all in this passage, this is what this narrative is showing us.
And that's the beauty of narrative.
It explains and shows us things.
So their word pictures for what forgiveness looks like.
It's one of the most powerful chapters of forgiveness in all of scripture.
And so as we kind of meditate on this theme of forgiveness, there's three aspects of forgiveness I wanna talk about that show us that forgiveness is so important, not just because of like interpersonal relationship issues, but it's bigger than that.
Forgiveness is ultimately about preserving and promoting life and renewal of all things and all creation.
And we see this as we learn these three things about forgiveness this morning.
First, forgiveness requires giving up control.
Second, that forgiveness is only possible by trusting in God's providence.
And finally, that forgiveness opens the door to reconciliation.
So again, forgiveness requires giving up control.
Forgiveness is only possible by trusting God's providence.
And finally, that forgiveness opens the door to reconciliation.
So first, forgiveness requires giving up control.
And for the record, this is probably the easiest of the three things.
So this is a buckle up.
This is a rough one.
If you want to be a forgiving person, it's not easy.
Forgiveness requires giving up control.
So again, in the end to this scene, Joseph, throughout his speech, he reminds them and tells them how powerful he is.
It's almost as if like the Pharaoh works for him.
He's ruler over all the land.
He's a father to Pharaoh, which is kind of a strange saying, we're not gonna get into that, what that means.
But all I have to say is Joseph is a powerful man, ruler of the land, his brothers, he's been testing them and they're caught in his trap and they're exposed and he has all the power in this moment.
And if you think about it, forgiveness, if forgiveness is releasing someone of a debt that's owed to you, that they've incurred,
Then that means you have power over them.
You have control over that person.
That means they owe you.
They have a debt to you.
And what does Joseph do with the debt that they have towards him?
He gives it up.
And you see this here.
It's this powerful scene where he clears the room and says, make everyone go out for me so that no one stayed with him or Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
And he wept aloud so that all the Egyptians heard it and the household of Pharaoh heard it.
He clears the room and you got to think his brothers are like, what is about to happen to us?
And then he starts weeping.
And this isn't just like, you know, a little tear-jurkel end of a Disney movie kind of thing.
This is like loud, uncontrollable, loud weeping, where people in another room could hear him, where his servants could hear him.
This is profound openness.
He's losing control even of his own emotions.
It's not measured.
It's not dignified.
And then he says these words, I'm Joseph.
It's my father's still alive.
I'm Joseph.
He reveals himself to his brothers.
He gives up his control of the situation and tells his brothers
who he is.
This is like one of those scenes.
If you're, you know, you watch that movie when you know something about the character, but as an audience, but the characters don't know that about the person, and finally it's all building up this tension until you get this big reveal.
This is what's happened is this big reveal.
And how do the brothers respond?
It terrifies them.
They were dismayed at his presence.
And then it says this,
So Joseph said that his brothers come near to me, please, and they came near.
And he said, I am your brother Joseph, whom you sold into Egypt.
But now do not be distressed or angry with yourselves because you sold me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
So in this moment, Joseph reveals himself.
He draws them close, not to punish them, but he assures them.
He's like, don't worry.
I'm not going to harm you.
He shows mercy.
He still names their wrong.
He's like, you, you did sell me.
Like you did.
Just, you know, I'd remember you didn't sell me in the slavery.
Just so we clear that did happen.
It's real, but he doesn't hold it over him.
He takes that power he has over him.
He names it.
He doesn't pretend.
And let's go of it.
The leverage that he has over them, he gives it up.
And in fact, him giving it up actually gives his whole family leverage in the land.
They get the best of the land because of who they are.
He gives it up.
And for us to be a forgiving people, for us to follow Christ's commands to forgive.
As Christ has forgiven us, it requires us giving up control over people who owe debts to us.
Again, this doesn't mean you ignore the problem.
When God forgives us, He does not ignore the problem of sin in our lives.
Sin is never ignored.
It's always dealt with.
We can be confident to name it because of that.
But what does it do with that wrongdoing?
It forgives.
It gives up that control that you have over someone else.
It releases someone of the debt.
And this is a beautiful thing to think about, especially it's beautiful when this has happened to you and you've done wrongs someone grievously and they have let go of
let you out of that debt.
It feels amazing.
It's a beautiful thing, but it's very dangerous thing too, isn't it?
Giving up the control that you have over someone's debt is hard.
Because again, it can feel like cheap.
It can feel like you're just excusing.
It's like, no, but they owe me.
You don't understand.
They actually owe me right now.
If I do this, I'm not just giving up control, but I'm actually giving them power over me.
Why would I do that?
I need to at least make them earn it.
I need to make, I need them to just show me that they're really actually sorry.
They have to earn it.
They have to pay for it and somehow.
How can we possibly give up that control that we have?
Ultimately, it's because this is what Christ does for you.
Listen, while you were his enemy, while you were in grievous sin against him, what does he do?
He dies for you.
It's not us who first love Christ, but it's Christ who first loves us, releasing us of our debt to Him.
And as He has done that for you, so you were called to do for others.
And unless you actually can release someone of the debt that they owe you, even when they don't ask, and especially when they don't deserve it, I fear it means you will never understand what Christ has actually accomplished for you, the measure with which He's forgiven you.
You know, Jesus tells this great parable of this really wealthy man who has somebody who works for him and he forgives him of a debt.
And then it's a big debt and that guy's like, sweet.
And he goes back to his house and he has got a servant who's owes less to him and he throws him in prison for it.
And then the rich wealthy leader's like, what are you doing?
How could you not forgive this person who owes less when you just received that great forgiveness from me?
And this is what,
we have to be able to see is how much we've been forgiven if we want to be a forgiving people.
We have offended God by our sin far more than anyone has offended us.
As he forgives and releases us of that, so we're called to forgive, and we first are able to forgive by giving up our sense of control of others.
This leads to another question.
How can we possibly
Give up that control what we have over others.
When we give up that control others, it puts that other person in a position where they might be able to harm us again.
How can we possibly put ourselves in that kind of vulnerable position?
I think this is actually a thing that keeps us from moving towards forgiveness because we know what it's going to cost and we don't want to pay that price.
So how do we actually move towards somebody and let go?
This leads to the second thing we learn about forgiveness.
First, forgiveness requires kind of giving up that sense of control over someone that you have as they owe you.
But secondly, forgiveness is only possible by trusting God's providence.
Forgiveness is only possible by trusting God's providence.
Listen, if vulnerability is the cost of forgiveness, which is given up power and control, then providence makes that cost bearable.
And you see this lace throughout this passage.
Verse five, it says, and now do not be distressed or angry with yourselves because you stole me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
Verse seven again, and God sent me before you to preserve you.
And then again, in verse eight, so it was not you who sent me here, but God.
Joseph clearly emphasizing this point
that he will emphasize further in Genesis 50 with the more famous line from Joseph.
Listen, this isn't you that sent me here.
This is God that sent me here.
He's making it clear God sent me.
He's not where he is because his brothers sold him ultimately.
He is there because God wants him there.
This is not God merely making the best out of a bad situation.
This is not God just using something, trouble something's like, oh, the brothers show them, okay, now I can work this out and make him still get to Egypt, I got this plan, I got this plan, BAC, turn that page 24 or whatever in a binder to see what's next for him, this is not what's happening here.
Clear in this language, in this language throughout Joseph's story, as God is not just using this, but he's causing this all to happen, he's sending him.
It's this word that we use is providence, which is,
God's governing all creatures and their actions.
God's providence has led Joseph to Egypt.
And when we talk about God's providence, especially in situations like that, it does open up a can of worms.
If you want a fuller conversation of providence, and the first chapter where we meet Joseph, I did a whole sermon, was on the providence of God speaking about this story.
But just to get in this a little bit, because this is the whole point of this second point, is God's providence helping us in forgiveness.
The question and the can of worms around this topic is always this.
If God is actually governing all creatures in their actions, and that includes the actions that are sinful, so does that mean God caused the brothers to sin?
I mean, this is God's doing, and God's actually moving this is, how can you and I be responsible for sin if God's the one that's actually governing
every one of our actions.
Doesn't that mean God's responsible for sin?
And there's always this tension in this paradox about Scripture.
And these two things are to be held together and they are both true.
Because it's largely left unexplained for us in the deepest level that we want.
We want everything to be neat and tidy so we can understand everything.
But when it comes to the things of God, there are just things that we will not fully understand.
And what Scripture does not apologize for the fact that God is sovereign over all things.
He's providentially leading things into your life and leading you out of those things to better things.
He is in control of every situation.
Nothing happens outside his divine control and his plan for your life.
And yet, you and I are still responsible for our sin, for our actions.
God is not the author of sin.
He is full of righteousness and holiness.
These things are true.
God's plan was to move Joseph to Egypt.
And yet he is not responsible for the sin of these brothers.
There's a paradox there.
And I'm not sure we will fully solve this.
On this side of eternity, it is a mystery.
And the key for this mystery here for us is this, that forgiveness does not require us to solve that mystery, but it requires us to trust that our God is in control, that is providentially in control, governing all the creatures and their actions.
And what that means for us is that we need to trust that God is the one that's writing our story.
It's not those who sin against you that are writing your story,
It's not your bitterness that is right in your story.
It is God is right in your story.
And even the hard stuff that he brings into your life, even the offenses that he brings into your life, he will lead you through them.
Your life is not happening to you by accident, by chance.
God is never surprised by your life.
Even the challenges that come, God's never like, oh, we didn't see that coming.
It's not, it's not who God is.
Our God's character is sovereign, divinely,
seeing everything that happens in this world.
And I think this perspective helps change how we see forgiveness.
Because if God is writing Joseph's story, then his brothers aren't the authors of his future.
Their actions wound him and put him in a tough spot for 20 years before he finally gets to have this position here in Egypt, but they don't define him.
They don't control him.
So he doesn't have to hold on to these things that have been done to them.
He doesn't need the exact vengeance on his brothers, but he can trust the God in his time and we'll take care of these things.
He can let go of any obsession that he has of control because he knows he actually doesn't have control.
Anytime we think we're in control of this situation, you're not, you're actually not in control as much as you think.
As someone who loves, I love to have control over things, right?
I have to just remind it for myself.
I'm not in control of anything.
And this is what providence helps teach us.
That God's the one that's actually in control.
God's the one that's writing the stories of our lives and this frees you if it frees myself, it frees Joseph from having to play God.
From trying to figure out like I need to control all the outcomes of the story.
You can forgive.
You can let go of outcomes.
You can release someone of the debt they owe you even when it is great.
When you learn how to trust that God is providentially writing your story.
Now you might think, well, I wish you would have written my story a little different.
I can think of some parts I might want to like erase and change a little bit.
How is this?
How is this good?
How can I trust Him when He's bringing so much pain into my life?
Because of where your life will ultimately be led to.
And it's life.
You see this here, like the reason for preservation in verse five, God sent me before you to preserve life.
And again in verse seven, God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on earth to keep you alive.
God's providence always moves us towards life.
This is his character.
The pain and suffering that come into our lives are not our end.
In the moment you think it is, in the moment you think this season is going to last forever.
This is pain is forever.
But it's not the promise of Scripture.
This is teaching us about his character.
I've got to lead you to life.
Now, sometimes we get the experience, taste of that life on this side of eternity.
Sometimes we don't get to taste it until
our eternal life until we taste death and then we get to experience life everlasting.
Either way, God is leading you to life and you can further you can trust that he is leading you to life because our God is a God who entered our story.
Our God is a God who entered the pains of what it means to be human.
He took our debt and our pain on himself.
The cost of this was his own death, but his life did not end in death.
But he rose to new life.
This gives us a cycle of what he's doing in this world.
He's bringing all creation through death and rebirth.
Because he's doing this in the world and because he insert himself into the story, he's not aloof from your pain.
He knows your pain.
He knows your suffering.
He knows betrayal.
As a human, he knows betrayal from Judas and the Romans who killed him.
As God, he knows betrayal from his people that are constantly rebelling against him.
He knows betrayal.
He knows your pains.
He knows the harms that you've happened to you.
And he is the only one that can lead you through those pains and those deaths to life.
And he promises to do that.
We're just called to trust that that is where he is taking us.
Listen, I get it.
People have harmed you in grievous ways and ways that I don't know.
And it's hard to trust that God is in control of situations.
And this story is showing us, listen, God is not surprised by the pains in your life.
He brings us into our life to bring us out, to bring us to life.
We can trust Him with our story.
Because He knows our story because He has tasted our story.
And when we learn to trust God with our story, trust that He is in providentially guiding all of our aspects of our lives
It's not just forgiveness that becomes possible.
But resurrection on this side of eternity becomes possible.
Reconciliation becomes possible.
This is the third thing we see here is that forgiveness opens the door to reconciliation.
So we think about forgiveness.
Forgiveness is this release of debt where forgiveness releases debt.
Reconciliation restores relationship.
Well, he could release someone of a debt that they owe to you and still never talk to them again and not become best friends again.
But reconciliation does the second half of that.
Forgiveness releases that reconciliation, restored relationship, friendship, fellowship.
And you see this in the scene here.
Not only is there forgiveness that's happening, but there's reconciliation.
There's weeping.
They're embracing.
They're kissing.
And at the end,
After that, his brothers talked with him.
I love that it's like telling us, yeah, they had a conversation.
It was kind of fun to think about.
They're catching up over the last 20 years.
What's going on?
I'm kind of curious what they talked about.
There's a lot of interesting things that that could have gone.
But there's peace, there's reconciliation with him and his brothers.
And then you get this profound moment at the end.
Verse 25 to 28, it says, so they went up
out of Egypt and came to the land of Canaan to their father Jacob, and they told him Joseph is still alive, his ruler over all the land of Egypt, and his heart became numb, for he did not believe him.
And when they told him all the words Joseph, which he had said to them, which he had saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob revived, and Israel said it is enough.
Joseph, my son, is still alive.
I will go see him before I die."
This is a beautiful moment.
This father who lost his son,
who before said, I'm going to go down to Sheol in mourning, go into death mourning.
He finds out his son is alive.
I know we struggle at doing this, especially in stories that we know well.
Just imagine you spent 22 years thinking a child of yours is dead.
And to find out that there's still life, even if you don't have children in this room, you can imagine.
So that's an overwhelming feeling.
22 years, you thought your son was dead.
Not only that, it's your favorite son.
I mean, I don't have favorite sons.
You guys are all the same.
To me and my eyes.
But it's his favorite son.
I thought he was dead and now he's alive.
It's an overwhelmingly beautiful scene and there's this other aspect to it that's hinted at here but is not explicit.
Like the truth is coming out.
Lies are being revealed in this moment.
Right.
The fathers, I mean, they've got a long journey to Egypt.
The fathers are going to be like, so what happened when you got the cloak?
Did you really see them eaten alive by an animal or what happened there?
You know, they're going to have to tell them.
And you actually get a hint to this in verse 24.
It says, do not quarrel on the way.
What is that about?
Well, most commentators would suggest that that's probably like, hey,
Don't like trying to figure out how you're going to sell the story to your dad when you get there.
I know you guys are going to try to work something out to make it sound like it's not your fault.
No, it's all right.
It's all good.
I forgive you.
You can be honest with him.
I mean, my dad's getting his son back.
I think he'll let this go.
But there's this beautiful moment where this family, there's been through so much chaos.
So much weirdness, so much disobedience, so many gross stories even.
This family is finally being restored, and the Father's spirit is revived from shield to life, and there's this resurrection moment in this family.
I think that's what reconciliation is.
It's resurrection moments, from death to life.
This is where forgiveness doesn't just release guilt.
It creates an opportunity for life, and then they get this
They get a new land and then there's reunited family and this is a new remnant that preserves this line that even Jesus himself comes from the line of Judah, resurrecting that which is lost and it makes it possible for reconciliation to happen and just restore this healed relationship.
It's beautiful.
And this is where forgiveness leads us to wholeness, to life.
not just in a personal life, but life that explodes out into the world, that touches everything that we touch.
This is this beautiful moment where you see that love and it's keeping no record of wrongs.
It doesn't pretend like sin didn't happen.
It's not like it's against putting parameters in place to help us not sin again, but it enables people to live together without the past controlling the present.
It's a beautiful moment.
One of the things about this point that I'm trying to make clear too, is that forgiveness opens the door to reconciliation, but forgiveness is not guaranteed reconciliation.
There's not going to guarantee this part, and many of you have tasted this.
Forgiveness is something that you're commanded to do.
It's a non-optional part of, not that we don't struggle, I'm not saying you have to be perfect at this, but forgiveness is something that we are called to do.
It's a command of the Lord.
Forgive as I've forgiven you.
And this is something we're all fight and work to grow.
Yes, I need to forgive.
Reconciliation is not a command.
It's not guaranteed.
As part of our ministry, the ministry of reconciliation, the service of reconciliation where we restore all things to crisis.
So what we're working for is not guaranteed.
There's a lot of situations where reconciliation, where restored friendship and fellowship is just not always possible.
in cases of profound abuse and domestic violence, sexual abuse, reconciled relationships with those people is not always possible or recommended this side of eternity.
It doesn't mean that like sometimes you can have a someone who has faith in Christ commit a grievous sin against someone else and there can be forgiveness.
And maybe you'll run into that person one day in heaven and that's a reconciled moment where you can, you can do that in heaven.
But sometimes this side of eternity, those, those relationships don't heal in that kind of way.
And this is not a failure of faith.
This is the reality of living in a world that is still very much broken.
a world that is still in the midst of this death and resurrection cycle.
We're still going through many cycles of death and resurrection.
Every time you die in your own life and you live to Christ, part of the old man dies and you rise again with less of the old man than you have before, but we have to go through cycles of this over and over.
Just like you and I are going through this, you and your relationships are going through these death resurrection cycles.
The whole world is going through this death and resurrection cycle, which means there's still much that needs to be burned off of this world.
That's not gonna last for eternity.
Which means we still live in a broken world.
Which makes it challenging for us.
How do we live with some ambiguity?
The big question that you wanna know is, well how do we know if this is a reconciliation situation or if I can just forgive but not reconcile?
I'd really rather not reconcile with this person.
So this is probably not a reconciled situation.
I'm just gonna forgive him and I'm gonna ignore him for the rest of my life.
Sound good?
All right, let's go.
That's what you want to know is like, how do I know about my situation?
And this is where, again, there's a lot of gray here.
It requires so much humility, like honest humility to look first at the gospel, say, okay, I've been forgiven much.
I'm called to forgive much.
Start there, the humility to recognize that and the wisdom to apply it in life.
And how do we have humility and wisdom?
Well, I think ultimately we gain those things and are able to apply those to our lives in the context of community.
with churches for to help us grow in humility and wisdom.
And in the church, we learned to help discern this for each other because sometimes you just need time before you can move towards reconciliation.
Sometimes you do need to stop at forgiveness.
I'm going to release you that's dead.
I'm actually going to fight towards not being bitter.
I'm going to release this, let go of bitterness.
My challenge to you is don't be quick to assume your situation is a non-reconcilating situation.
I mean, just because it's hard and challenging and just because you can't imagine how it could happen doesn't mean that God's not leading you to make that happen or to work towards it and to fight for it.
I mean, I can't imagine it was easy for Joseph again, his brother sold him into slavery.
It's kind of a big deal.
And yeah, here he is.
I mean, if someone, if you had siblings sell you into slavery,
I'm guessing it would be hard for you to imagine actually being friends with them again, right?
But that's what happened to Joseph.
I can't imagine I was easy to forgive, to let go of it.
His wounds were not small.
All to say is be slow to assume your situation is a non-reconcilating type of situation, especially when you consider the character of our God.
Our God is a God who brings dead things to life.
That's just specialty.
I mean, that's how creation started.
The cosmos was dead, right?
It was void.
He burrs it with life.
Even in exile, God creates life.
He feeds His people.
He goes into the grave and comes out again three days later.
And his resurrection bears fruit.
I mean, the fruits of the spirit, that's what your lives, they produce fruit.
Our God is a fruitful, multiplying God.
He brings life from death.
So if you're going to assume anything, assume that God wants to bring life out of your broken relationships.
And assume that he is the one God who can.
And he can.
There's so many stories I could tell you of marriages who
There's no, if you looked at it from the outside, you're like, oh, that's not gonna end well.
And they fight and they have life or betrayals from friendships.
Our God is a God who resurrects things.
Miracles happen by his hand.
This is what we're called to believe in, to have faith in, to work towards.
Of course, if someone, if the offending party or whatever,
doesn't want to work towards reconciliation.
That doesn't really happen, but the Lord changes hearts.
This is meant to define us to be forgiving, reconciled people.
Again, this is what we read earlier, that we have a ministry of reconciliation.
This is how we serve in the world as we bring renewal to be a people who have a short memory of wrong, to be a people who are quick to forgive because we know that we have
been transformed by a God who first forgave us.
And we are called to live out in this world as a people not ruled by bitterness, but ruled by love, by mercy, by grace.
And as we receive this, we go out into the world with this, into our homes, into our families, into our neighborhoods, into our workplaces as forgiven and forgiving people.
And this makes you a life-giving person, because forgiveness always leads to life.
And in a world and in a city that is desperate for life, we're called to be people who bring this ministry of reconciliation that leads to life to bear.
May we become and grow into this kind of people who bring the ministry of reconciliation to bear in a world that's war with itself.
Pray with me.
Merciful God in heaven, we give you thanks for your word, your word which you tell us is better than life,
I pray that you would help us to see exactly what you've forgiven us from.
As we see that, I pray that you'd help us to be people who are not proud but humbled by this truth.
Maybe we would go out forgiving and bringing your healing of forgiveness to a world that needs.
We pray this in your holy name.
Amen.